# 2.x JavaScript Fundamentals



## 2.1 Hello,World



### [The “script” tag](https://javascript.info/hello-world#the-script-tag)

JavaScript programs can be inserted almost anywhere into an HTML document using the `<script>` tag.

For instance:

```html
<!DOCTYPE HTML>
<html>

<body>

  <p>Before the script...</p>

  <script>
    alert( 'Hello, world!' );
  </script>

  <p>...After the script.</p>

</body>

</html>
```

You can run the example by clicking the “Play” button in the right-top corner of the box above.



### [External scripts](https://javascript.info/hello-world#external-scripts)

If we have a lot of JavaScript code, we can put it into a separate file.

Script files are attached to HTML with the `src` attribute:

```markup
<script src="/path/to/script.js"></script>
```



### [Summary](https://javascript.info/hello-world#summary)

-   We can use a `<script>` tag to add JavaScript code to a page.
-   The `type` and `language` attributes are not required.
-   A script in an external file can be inserted with `<script src="path/to/script.js"></script>`.

There is much more to learn about browser scripts and their interaction with the webpage. But let’s keep in mind that this part of the tutorial is devoted to the JavaScript language, so we shouldn’t distract ourselves with browser-specific implementations of it. We’ll be using the browser as a way to run JavaScript, which is very convenient for online reading, but only one of many.



## 2.2 Variables

###  [A variable](https://javascript.info/variables#a-variable)

A [variable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variable_(computer_science)) is a “named storage” for data. We can use variables to store goodies, visitors, and other data.

To create a variable in JavaScript, use the `let` keyword.

The statement below creates (in other words: *declares*) a variable with the name “message”:

```javascript
let message;
```

Now, we can put some data into it by using the assignment operator `=`:

```javascript
let message;

message = 'Hello'; // store the string 'Hello' in the variable named message
```

The string is now saved into the memory area associated with the variable. We can access it using the variable name:

```javascript
let message;
message = 'Hello!';

alert(message); // shows the variable content
```

To be concise, we can combine the variable declaration and assignment into a single line:

```javascript
let message = 'Hello!'; // define the variable and assign the value

alert(message); // Hello!
```

We can also declare multiple variables in one line:

```javascript
let user = 'John', age = 25, message = 'Hello';
```

That might seem shorter, but we don’t recommend it. For the sake of better readability, please use a single line per variable.

The multiline variant is a bit longer, but easier to read:

```javascript
let user = 'John';
let age = 25;
let message = 'Hello';
```

Some people also define multiple variables in this multiline style:

```javascript
let user = 'John',
  age = 25,
  message = 'Hello';
```

…Or even in the “comma-first” style:

```javascript
let user = 'John'
  , age = 25
  , message = 'Hello';
```



###  [Constants](https://javascript.info/variables#constants)

To declare a constant (unchanging) variable, use `const` instead of `let`:

```javascript
const myBirthday = '18.04.1982';
```

Variables declared using `const` are called “constants”. They cannot be reassigned. An attempt to do so would cause an error:

```javascript
const myBirthday = '18.04.1982';

myBirthday = '01.01.2001'; // error, can't reassign the constant!
```

When a programmer is sure that a variable will never change, they can declare it with `const` to guarantee and clearly communicate that fact to everyone.

### [Uppercase constants](https://javascript.info/variables#uppercase-constants)

There is a widespread practice to use constants as aliases for difficult-to-remember values that are known prior to execution.

Such constants are named using capital letters and underscores.

For instance, let’s make constants for colors in so-called “web” (hexadecimal) format:

```javascript
const COLOR_RED = "#F00";
const COLOR_GREEN = "#0F0";
const COLOR_BLUE = "#00F";
const COLOR_ORANGE = "#FF7F00";

// ...when we need to pick a color
let color = COLOR_ORANGE;
alert(color); // #FF7F00
```

Benefits:

-   `COLOR_ORANGE` is much easier to remember than `"#FF7F00"`.
-   It is much easier to mistype `"#FF7F00"` than `COLOR_ORANGE`.
-   When reading the code, `COLOR_ORANGE` is much more meaningful than `#FF7F00`.

When should we use capitals for a constant and when should we name it normally? Let’s make that clear.

Being a “constant” just means that a variable’s value never changes. But there are constants that are known prior to execution (like a hexadecimal value for red) and there are constants that are *calculated* in run-time, during the execution, but do not change after their initial assignment.
